here we go Joe thank you thank you for
being here really appreciate it now it's
pleasure to be here it's a fascinating
subject of I'm really looking forward to
talking to you because the conscious
mind and how we how we evolved our
conscious mind how we have our conscious
mind I mean that is one of the more
unique things about being a person it is
how did it happen it's only a four
billion year story is so shall I tell
you how I got shortened to it and where
how I ended up thinking about that
problem so I've been working on how the
brain detects in response to danger for
most of my scientific career a little
bit before that I'd actually studied
consciousness and these people who have
their brain split apart to control
epilepsy called split brain patients so
I got interested in consciousness and
also in how behaviors that might be
produced non-consciously
affect what we know about ourselves so
we see ourselves doing something and
then we kind of consciously build that
into our narrative of what we are but a
lot of what we do we do non consciously
and when we interpreted that kind of
solidifies the fact that you have a non
conscious system that's controlling your
behavior when in fact you you didn't do
it but that system did so you got to
make sense of it and generate an
explanation of narrative so that that
was where I got started and I tried to
figure out well what would be some kinds
of non conscious systems and said well
maybe emotion systems or producing
behaviors that we don't fully understand
and I started studying that and ended up
figuring out how this part of the brain
called the amygdala receives information
about the environment and then controls
orchestrates all the responses
fight/flight kinds of responses to help
you protect yourself and the you know
after many years of doing that I started
asking well how far back does this
ability to detect and respond to danger
go
we know that bugs and flies can do that
and research had been done showing that
bugs and flies have certain molecules in
their brain that are important in these
kinds of
protected defensive behaviors and
including the ability to learn about
them and store those as memories so it's
easier to work on those little tiny
invertebrates than it is to do studies
in a complex brain even like a rat brain
which is pretty complex so given that
what these people had discovered about
invertebrates I and others who were
studying mammals decided to see if the
same molecules might be involved in
mammalian learning and in fact it was so
now that raises the question you got the
same molecules doing the same thing the
same molecules same genes doing the same
thing in ancient invertebrates and then
in animals like us so you ask we're back
in time is the ancestor that made that
possible you know if we've got the same
genes either it kind of happens
spontaneously separately or there's a
common ancestor and indeed there's a
common ancestor and that goes back to
the first organism first animal that had
a bilateral body which means had left
right front in the back and a top and a
bottom so it has kind of
three-dimensional sides before that
there were animals like jellyfish that
were radial but no front and back they
just have a top and a bottom and before
that they're sponges which have no front
back top bottom they just kind of
randomly organize so that's kind of the
that's the story of animals sponges -
jellyfish - these bilateral animals so
the ancestor the bilateral animal that
we're talking about gave rise to those
two lines one that became all these
invertebrates like flies and bugs and
snails and octopus and all those things
and another two animals like us
vertebrates on the fish reptiles mammals
birds and so forth so those are two
separate lines that inherited these
genes that make the memory and defensive
behavior possible so you said well how
far back in it does it stop there and no
it doesn't because you can find those
genes on
through Jellyfish and then keep going
into single-cell organisms now these are
like protozoa things that give you
intestinal there intestinal parasites so
they can you know give you upset stomach
and things like amoeba paramecia that
you might have heard of and you know
biology class in high school or
something
these have no nervous system and yet
they detect and respond to danger they
learn about their environment
they do all these sorts of things and
where did they come from well if you go
all the way back to where they came from
the even simpler kind of organism still
single-cell of course like bacterial
cells now these guys go back to the
beginning of life the first cell that
ever lived
some 3.7 billion years ago the gave rise
to the entire history of life was a
bacteria like cell that started dividing
now what's interesting that cell that
started dividing is the mother of every
bacterial cell that ever lived
so that cell is it's it's more like it's
you know that cell is still alive
because it's they reproduce by cell
division so that still cell just keeps
reproducing and part of that first cell
ever is still with us today and all the
bacterial cells that are that are around
it's kind of a mind-blowing thing is
it's incredibly Manon do we have any
idea why the first cell decided to
divide well this I shouldn't say it's
the first sound that decided what this
it's the first cell Tyrael so it's the
first cell that was able to sustain life
long enough to give off offspring that
could sustain and sustain and sustain so
there were probably lots of experiments
before a kind of cell a kind of group of
cells had the right stuff to be able to
do that so they those others never made
it because they didn't have quite enough
of what it took to be a cell that could
do that so the first cell I mean it's
kind of a hypothetical cell it's called
Luca the last Universal common ancestor
of life whoa
and that's so that's about 3.7
for an eight billion years ago but he
could have been a bunch of cells you
know a collection of cells cell types
that that one of which then you know
populated all of life the weird thing
about life is not just that it's
different and it varies so much but that
it's its ever increasing in its
complexity well if you go back to the
single cell and then you come all the
way to today to a person right like what
a weird sort of transformation you know
it's dangerous to talk about as if we're
moving towards some kind of goal you
know what I mean we are the goal but
nothing I don't think we know we're not
we're definitely not I've been more and
more thinking that artificial life is
the goal mmm-hmm well that I mean
there's no goal of life there's survival
is the only goal of every organism and
that's that's what that first cell was
able to do is to generate a set of
biological properties that could sustain
itself long enough to reproduce that's
all you have to do you have to live long
enough to reproduce and to do that you
have to have energy resources so you
have to incorporate nutrients you've got
to balance your fluids otherwise you
know you have to keep your eye on
straight or the cell will get too big
and explode or get too small and
collapse you've got a thermo-regulate
because all of these things depend on
the right kind of internal temperature
and you have to reproduce those are the
survival requirements of a cell but
they're also the survival requirements
of a human so the same things that a
bacterial cell has to do to live through
the day
and create a species is exactly what we
do every day to reproduce ourselves we
have to eat drink defend against danger
incorporate nutrients and balance loads
and ions that way defend you know
reproduce and so that was the
mind-blowing thing I see I wrote the
whole three-quarters of the book is a
scientific journalist dude I didn't know
I need this this stuff I had to just
learn it and there's a lot of fun but it
took a lot when when you think about the
original
Lucca and then human beings do you ever
try to extrapolate you ever try to like
keep the the process rolling in your
mind and see where it where's this gonna
go oh yeah so the end of the book I
paint a not so rosy picture of what was
just going well yeah so let's talk about
the end of the book so okay I you know
say okay well our but we have these two
kinds of significant experiences in our
lives that that occupy the human mind
one is the kind that we can call an
awareness of facts you know I this thing
is here and the other is what we might
call a self-awareness well it's it's me
that is aware that that is a bottle so
that's a that's a higher level and that
is what appears to be unique to the
human mind the ability to represent the
self as a subject in other words to have
these subjective experiences that have a
personal past it's not just the past but
your past you lived it and a personal
present and a potential future that you
can imagine different scenarios of you
existing in in the future so that
requires I mean that's called Auto
noetic consciousness the ability to to
self know about where you are in time
and it depends that this is an idea that
was proposed by a guy named Endel
talling a very distinguished
psychologist who's retired now but his
idea was that the unique aspect of of
the human mind is mental time travel the
ability to project ourselves in the past
present and future and without that kind
of consciousness we're limited to kind
of factual information something is
there you know that might I might be
able to say oh food is there or drink is
there or a sexual partner is there but
not necessarily that I want that food I
want you know you might have a kind of
biological urge
towards it now from the outside it looks
like everything we do is intentional and
willful so I think I'm controlling my
behavior you think you're controlling
yours I see you do something that I
might have done in a similar situation I
think you intentionally control that we
see a dog doing something that would be
similar to what we do we think we know
why the dog is doing that because it had
some intention but the fact is if we
start taking these things apart in the
brain we see that the systems that
control very simple behaviors or not the
ones that are doing all this high-level
conscious thought take the example of
the area I work on for all these years
which is threat detection now the part
of the brain called the amygdala is key
to the detection in response to threat
in a kind of basic sense you know threat
comes up you freeze if there's a snake
for example now it's all because of that
it's been assumed that the reason you
freeze is because you're afraid and
therefore that the amygdala is also
making the fear because they make de la
experiences the fear and that's why you
produce the response but I've for the
longest time in throughout most of my
career I've said the amygdala does not
consciously experience fear and yet my
work has been used to kind of sell and
and defend this idea of the amygdala is
the brains fear center I think that's
completely wrong the why do you think
it's been misinterpreted it's a long
complicated story but did you know it's
partly it's my fault because I was not
as vigilant as I should have been when I
was described need to see what I did was
I I would talk about the amygdala as a
non conscious state of fear non
conscious implicit for you and I would
say that while the neocortex is where we
consciously experience fear and those
are separate but that was too
complicated the the journal is kind of
ignored it and it was just it just
became the amygdala
the brains fear center even the side
just ignored it because you know we were
studying and you know I kind of gave up
after I said okay we talked about it in
terms of fear because you know that
there was a lot of money to be directed
towards research if you're studying fear
and how you could treat that but I think
it's you know it's been kind of a wrong
path because it's led to the development
of medications that don't really work so
all the big companies are getting out of
the anti-anxiety business Manti for your
business because people still feel
fearful or anxious when they take them
you mean like xanax yeah these are
getting out of those annex business
benzos sanics I mean they're not either
that are repurposing them for other
purposes you know but so what happens is
you the way these things you know these
things the basic drugs were discovered
in the 60s almost accidentally in some
cases you know not rather than by some
hypothesis so the only thing that's been
discovered since then is more versions
of the same thing with you know slightly
fewer side-effects there's been no new
discovery of a new kind of drug that's
going to help people and why is that
well the way the drugs are discovered is
that take a rat or a mouse put in a
challenging situation
give it some different medications and
the ones that make the animal less timid
in those situations is assumed to make
the animal less fearful that's why it's
less timid so when you give it to a
person they should be less fearful but
what you find is say a person with
social anxiety might find it easier to
go to the party and they're less timid
but still like just while they're there
and the reason is that we now know is
that damage to the amygdala in a person
doesn't necessarily also eliminate the
feeling of fear it gets rid of the the
body responses but not to feel mm so it
was a misunderstanding of what behavior
can tell us we treat behavior as if it's
an ambassador of the mine but behavior
is really a tool of survival it goes
back to those first cells that ever
lived who had to defend against danger
bacterial cells move in there in the
water and then they come across like you
know a gradient of some chemical that's
a toxin as soon as they detect that they
bounce away and go in a different
direction if they go if they find a
gradient of something that is a nutrient
they keep going and absorb it so they
have the ability to detect what's useful
and harmful in their lives these are not
these are not there for psychology
they're simply there to keep the
organism alive and many of the behaviors
that persist throughout the whole
history of life or like that they're
there because each of the cell and cells
in the body has to you know do all these
things to stay alive and so the organism
as a whole has to do it as well defend
against danger incorporated nutrients
balanced LeWitt's thermoregulate
reproduce so these are survival tools
not mind tools now we can use our mind
in conjunction with these things and
because we can we conflate every time
we're freezing in the front of the snake
till the fact that the fear is what's
causing it but the fear is a separate
process it's the awareness that that
stuff is happening to you the awareness
of that stuff is happening to you so it
said no self no fear oh that's my
t-shirt yo that's my merch on the book
now how do things like xanax work what
what's the mechanical process okay so
the that's a part of the class of drugs
called benzodiazepine and they will they
bind to receptors in the brain the brain
has receptors for all kinds of chemicals
and many of these things are things that
exist in nature and what the development
that they bind to as a receptor called
the gaba receptor which is the major
inhibitory transmitter in the brain so
when you have a benzodiazepine binding
to a gaba receptor what it's going to do
is increase inhibition so the you know
the kind of simple reason why those
things can help is they kind of in here
that so they toned down the brain a bit
and so things that would normally
trigger a response no longer trigger it
so it's like increasing the threshold
for something to bother you in a sense
and a lot of people enjoy that with
alcohol they're not supposed to well the
alcohol also attacks those herself or so
it's like it you get double with the
effect right is that why they tell
people don't have sex yeah because you
can you know if you take a lot of sin x
and drink a lot of booze you can OD or
you could just say crazy things not
totally be aware do you remember that
story about a woman she was I believe
she's a publicist and she got on a plane
and she's flying to Africa and she said
I'm going to Africa hope I don't get
AIDS
just kidding I'm white lol she's being
funny and you laughed and she landed in
Africa that's a bit a surprise
do you know the story no but there are
other stories this was one of the
original stories of someone ruining
their entire life just putting you know
one little tweet online she thought she
was being funny like she she would say a
bunch of snarky things like that a bunch
of funny trying to be fun right but she
was on xanax and drinking there and woke
up completely oblivious and her life had
been destroyed yeah she was fired you
know she was a social pariah and I'm
pretty sure that was an annex and
alcohol that she was blaming it on yeah
well you know these are powerful drugs
and so you know back to how they work
you know they work so a drug like that
all of the drugs that we take go to the
entire body you know they don't they're
not able to just you know find their way
to one little spot in the brain to do
their trick there's this you know talk
about magic bullet by bullet Joyce it
might be able to be targeted for
specific circuits and but that's you
know fantasy at this point so if you
reduce inhibition in the entire brain
yes you might reduce you know anxiety
but you're also going to change
of other things so you're gonna make for
example forethought and ability to rein
in things like the stuff the woman was
saying more difficult because they're
attacking the prefrontal cortex where
you have some inhibitory control over
behavior they're going to alter your
ability to retrieve and store memories
and to attend to things and you know to
the extent that these drugs have a
positive effect on some people it's been
said that part of the reason is that
it's kind of a general blunting of
emotion it's not an anti-anxiety drug
it's just kind of a dulling of
everything and you get bangs i.d
anti-anxiety as a part of that but if we
want to understand how to do better we
have to you know figure out what the
brain circuit that's really making us
anxious is and not just what's making us
you know but not toning down to
everything it's kind of like you know
you go to restaurant but musics too loud
so my sis please turn it down so they
turn it down a little bit the music
stays the same is the same song but it's
not as annoying you know because you've
turned the volume down and I think
that's what a lot of what these
medications can do is turn the volume
down a bit or turn it up you know
depending on what you do correct me if
I'm wrong but isn't there some sort of a
slingshot effect like after you take
these things and your anxieties ramped
up afterwards well it can be a rebound
you know the fact that can also be kind
of a lot of people next day feel
depressed you know because they're just
the stuff is out of your system and this
coming you know if you take it's kind of
like taking sleeping pills things like
ambien are of the same general category
of drugs
benzodiazepines and so you get this
hangover the next day okay so it's just
a physiological response to the
medication yes not that if you alleviate
some anxiety then the anxiety wants to
come back in stronger know that I mean
so I you know I've also proposed and in
my previous book that we chavin anxiety
set point that you know that let's say
you're worried about something
and all of a sudden that gets resolved
I just makes room for the next thing
tomorrow so you know we've kind of
filled that void because our brain is
you know we've developed a brain that
has a certain kind of set point for
everything it's doing and that just
makes room for you know to fill that
fill that up if you're an anxious person
you probably will always be somewhat
anxious so there's no magic bullet
that's going to take that out what you
have to do is attack the process from
knowledge of how it all works and that
requires that we have a more
sophisticated understanding that when
then as possible from simply observing
behavior because behavior does not tell
you necessarily what's on them on
behavior tells you how the brain has
responded but you know just to go back
to the the fear thread example when
let's say I bring you into the
laboratory I show you a picture of
something like a blue square my
colleague list felt - used to be - I use
now at Harvard did experiments like this
and every time the blue square would
come on the person would get a mild
shock to their finger and so then she
would present the blue square
subliminally that means you know really
quickly with you know something that
follows it that kind of masks that and
that prevents the information from
getting into the conscious mind and so
the person so that I didn't see anything
but if you put the person in an imaging
machine fMRI and image what's happening
that's stimulus that threat the blue
square gets to the amygdala turns it on
the heart begins to race palms are
sweating but the person has no fear hmm
the person doesn't know it's there and
doesn't experience fear the amygdala is
not about fear it's about detecting and
responding to danger in order to be
afraid that has to reach your conscious
mind so that you can experience it as
the state of this automatic
consciousness
we're talking about a self involved
consciousness that's hard for people to
separate yeah well believe that there's
a physical response but that your mind
is unaware of it right but when you
understand that that's why you couldn't
understand that's why the medications
are not working they're targeted to work
on these underlying systems and rats or
mice but that's not where we are
experiencing our anxiety but these these
medications are very profitable right I
mean people enjoy it millions of
prescriptions get written yeah we're
just gonna phase those out they'll
probably you know like they're probably
all going off patent and because the
company can't find anything new they're
not gonna keep pursuing it because you
know it's not gonna be a profit anymore
but don't people still want them I mean
it seems like that's a really popular
medication yes I'll be like they'll go
too you know they become generics and
people will be able to get them for less
money and they'll just do with whatever
they want yeah off label whatever yeah I
mean it's you know it's I I do think
that for example the drugs that are
available do help people because it's
important to reduce the behavioral
timidity and the physiological arousal
that goes with that because if you don't
treat that then the conscious mind will
be reactivated by those responses if you
only treat the conscious mind then the
physiological stuff will bring the
conscious stuff back yeah everything
will bring back there everything else
unless you treat the whole system and
you have to do that you have to
understand the system and we've just
misunderstood it I think for so long I
have a friend who he takes it every day
takes xanax every day him and he says he
needs it he says without it he's just a
mess well you know whatever gets you
through the day I guess you know it's
I'm not a therapist I'm not right
advocating that I know I understand but
from your perspective from an
understanding of the human mind and all
the systems that are at work it seems
like that's really not the way to do it
yeah I mean it's you know I'm sure that
that
that you know it in a sense maybe that's
his crutches way to get through the day
and he's come to believe that he needs
that much like an alcoholic believes
they need to drink yep
yeah but I'm not calling him and you
know welcome he does like to drink -
yeah but he's a great guy what these
these systems that are in place and the
all the various things that have gotten
us to 2019 as a human species when you
study anxiety and you study fear and all
these different things is are we
experiencing high levels of it because
there's not as much real physical danger
as our ancestors experienced and it's
almost like we're looking for it when
it's not necessarily there like we're
we're programmed to be able to deal with
it yeah that's a good point
I hadn't thought of it that way but I
think that's a good way to think about
it I mean you know the philosopher
Kierkegaard said that anxiety is the
price we pay for the human ability to
choose and this is where our auto noetic
consciousness comes in our ability to
think of ourselves as having a past in
the future and to be able to plan and
choose in the future you know he said it
started with Adam making the first
choice as a human in the Garden of Eden
and that was where it all began
so in our ability you know you can
rephrase that statement by saying our
ability to choose is what allows us to
be anxious because that is what anxiety
is a worry about what we have we're
gonna make the right decision you know
how can we deal with this thing that's
coming up it's a worry about the future
and the ability to think about the
possibilities right like what could go
wrong would I go right am i doing the
right thing yeah and then to contemplate
all those various choices right anxiety
yeah so like you know you're walking
through the woods as a snake you might
freeze but almost instantly that fear
that is generated by you freezing and
seeing
snake morphs into anxiety you know will
the snake bite me hmm if it bites me
will I get to a doctor will he have the
anecdote if I die what will happen to my
family you know that's word that's
sayings on you so these are they're kind
of separate fear is about a danger
that's present anxieties about one that
hasn't happened yet almost always as
soon as you're afraid that makes you
anxious about what's going to happen and
then there's general existential angst
mm-hmm just the life itself existence is
that just what is it what yeah
and all of that is due to our prefrontal
cortex our ability to conceptualize to
you know imagine things that have never
been imagined before to create art to
build to create architecture build
buildings imagine going to the moon
designing an instrument to do that and
actually pulling it off and make sure it
can get back all of that is something
that our special kind of consciousness
enables but it has a dark side which is
it also allows us to be incredibly
selfish and self-centered and
narcissistic and to support tribes and
groups and you know unless we I mean I
think that the world survives best when
it's either completely isolated all the
cultures are isolated or if we could
also somehow be together in a more
unified way because of the direction
we're going now where each country is
isolating itself but it still so
entangled with all the others is recipe
does it for disaster is this because we
evolved essentially without long term
travel I mean we kind of evolved to stay
in whatever area the resources were in
when we're hunters and gatherers and
then somewhere along the line somebody
figured out boats and how to get on a
horse and the next thing you know you're
visiting
I think it's more about you know we have
a special kind of inquisitiveness that
we can because we can mentally model the
next step and plan what are the options
you know try to anticipate the the
problems that are going to come up and
take those steps and and that's a pretty
special thing but it also allows us to
plan in a kind of devious way where you
know me or my group is going to benefit
and if mine benefits I don't want the
other one to benefit because we got to
keep everything separate mmm
so it's you know consciousness are kind
of consciousnesses are you know greatest
achievement but also probably our worst
aspect move but it's but it's what makes
us human is imagining humans with no
consciousness is impossible and no it's
a there's no way to go in that direction
that's so is is the key to this thing as
the human race is it managing our
consciousness of perhaps maybe work like
yours giving us the tools to understand
what are the mechanisms involved that
maybe that can help us sort of navigate
our biological traps and maybe I mean I
think it's you know certainly we don't i
think the i have no idea what your
position on climate change is but
personally i think that things are
happening and something needs to be done
that's clearly things are happening and
that you know there was i read a couple
of editorials probably in the new york
times or something a couple of months
ago one was about how yes the things are
changing and we have a right to worry
but you know we shouldn't worry about
the earth as you know the famous quote
is guy is a tough bitch so the earth
will survive but the configuration of
life on it is unlikely to continue to be
the same under the
conditions the more that everything
changes the conditions of life change
and the first things to go and this is
what happened to the dinosaurs or large
energy demanding organisms because as
the conditions change and you know the
climate that we've lived in we've
succeeded because we were able to
benefit from that kind of climate but as
the climate begins to change our kind is
not going to be able to succeed as well
because those conditions are you know
the waters are rising the deserts are
expanding all these things are happening
and it's just not going to be yeah
species don't last that long few million
years and they go so our time maybe
we've only been around for what three
hundred four hundred thousand years and
something well depend on what what we
call we yeah but then the inner dolls
were around quite a bit longer than that
yeah they're not here anymore
so we don't have a I mean I think that
we can use our minds to try and you know
help us get through this but that's only
gonna work if we can do that
collectively that's the scary part we
have to work together collectively as a
world because these are not local issues
these are global issues yeah and that is
who has that good luck getting you know
especially getting other countries like
China to comply yeah but yeah you see
the small successes I mean like auto
companies deciding well we need to you
know rein in the emissions and they
there's probably a profit motive
underlying that at some point sure and
people are conscious there's green
dollars Yeah right like you wanna like
when when you think about technological
achievements and you think about the the
conscious mind and the ability to create
in the creative process do you envision
the possibility of some sort of a
technological solution to a lot of the
problems that we're facing I
has to be a social solution social how
so we have to we have to figure out how
to balance this worldwide
you can't this we can do whatever we
want in this country if we could do what
we want but you know if if even if we
were the best country in the world for
the environment that wouldn't solve the
problem you know it's it's a worldwide
problem you know Amazon forest that's
affecting a lot of people you know it's
just not a it's not a simple thing that
one country can solve right but if one
country takes steps and imposes some
sort of a technological solution that
pulls carbon from the atmosphere that
does enhance some sort of a cooling
process to bring homeostasis to bring
some sort of a like generally agreed
upon state right of the environment if
that's technologically possible I mean
that's going to come out of the creative
mind right well you know I don't want to
go too far off into my not area of
expertise like climate and salt labs I
just think there's I think I would from
the kind of the social perspective and
what are the ranges contributed but I
don't wanna I don't think I can really
dress the details of all that right but
even like socially if we did address it
socially we're still gonna have to deal
with the actual physical limitation
right of the just the environment that
we live in and what we've done this how
do some how other mitigate it yeah I
agree
yeah so but yeah so I think you know
creators coming along and trying to find
technical solutions that's great when
you analyze the human mind and knowing
what you know about the thought
processes and the way people think and
work when you see people in denial of
climate change and when you see people
that are so enamored with the the
concept of capitalism and big business
that they don't really think that it's a
big deal or they want to deny that it's
a big deal so that they can continue
short-term profits right what is that
like those mechanisms likewise watching
that take place in a monkeymod
yeah what do you what are you thinking
when you see that happen with humans I
you know I don't think it's simple it's
not simply denial of climate change for
climate reasons I think there's a lot of
social you know within certain groups
there's social stigma for being Pro
environment yes
and so it's tribal tribal it's it's
people yet people cling together and
it's a kind of form of self-protection
that by identifying a set of issues that
we all can agree upon because they're
kind of dictated top-down in a sense
that or our thing and then that thing is
somebody else's things yeah yeah that's
a weird aspect of being a human being
right these tribal identity things where
if you're in this group you must be
pro-choice and if you're in this group
you must be pro-life you must be
anti-war you must be pro-second
amendment no there's very little
deviation and and that that's left right
that's everything I mean that the belief
systems rigid belief systems a you know
part of just part of being and when you
look at politics and you know that these
belief systems are when do you find it
odd that we have these like sort of
polar opposites or at least left-right
choices red blue choices that we've
limited ourselves to these very distinct
tribes right and that's yeah I think
that's unfortunate but that's where we
are is there a way out of that I think
the political side just have to take
that one what do you think is the source
of creativity like somewhere along the
line I mean and we've seen it right I
mean there's some speculation and
scientists have sort of generally agreed
that some monkeys are in the Stone Age
that some primates are in what would be
considered Stone Age they're starting to
use tools they're starting to use sticks
and it is a famous photograph that I
love of an orangutan
and where are we gonna get a copy of
that we should get that orangutan with a
spear we make a note of that there's a
crazy of Ranga tang image of an
orangutan holding on to a branch and
then spearfishing
mmm it's amazing and apparently he had
seen humans do it and that's where he
learned the behavior imitation yes but
still that is a primate using a weapon
right to try to spear fish look at this
photo is that incredibly nice I mean
that is incredible
that's like really thoughtful and
skillful and the way he's hanging I mean
my goodness look at that
I love that picture that picture is
amazing yeah now this the creativity
that allows you to get food when you
couldn't get food allows you to escape
from environmental conditions allows you
to escape from predators all these
things are rewarded by the continuing of
your genetics so but there are other
things that come into play one of the
specialties that that came along I think
is a byproduct of having language and by
language I don't mean words but what
language did but what was required for
language to come out of the brain which
is the development of a cognitive sort
of architecture in our brain that
allowed all kinds of mental jumping
around so for example for most animals
to learn you know who to trust and who
not to trust and what some what who's
what in a given situation who's gonna do
what to whom by just looking around they
have to go through trial and error
learning it see the experience all of
that a lot but the human mind can
simulate create a mental model and
instantaneously make those kinds of
predictions on the basis of very limited
information and this is based on
something well we the relation to
language is that syntax gives you those
kinds of options because you can you
know you have past present future States
that can be related to
you and two others and so forth and
personal pronouns are very important in
terms of me I mine you yours that those
the the point when those come in and a
child is the first point when I think
self-awareness can fully be tested and
shown have some people say well they
have it but they just couldn't express
it others say no that the arrival of the
pronoun personal pronouns are very
important in the child's development of
a sense of self but anyway so language
changes the brain changes the cognitive
architecture of the brain and allows for
something just to throw out a technical
term hierarchical relational reasoning
just the ability to think across kind of
conceptual categories laterally and
horizontally so that the information you
can just jump around and that's kind of
what creativity is the ability to just
jump around in middle space and come up
with something by a unique combination
of those things do you do you think that
there's variation in terms of the types
of languages like Chinese versus Spanish
versus that they allow you to interface
with the world in a different way
as the language is structured very
different yeah I think that's absolutely
right but I don't know if enough about
other languages to say exactly how I
think it was Malcolm Gladwell if it was
the outlier so they discussed this like
the limitations of certain languages in
terms of pilots was it Gladwell I think
it was where they were they're
discussing how Korean Airlines because
they have sort of a hierarchy of you
know the way you're supposed to treat
the upper levels of management and they
that they had to force these pilots to
all speak English so that they didn't
have this hierarchy like that this
presumed hierarchy being able to address
situations that planes had crashed
because co pilots were in their place
they were put in their place and weren't
allowed to address pilots and that once
they had switched over to English that
the language like theirs
so many different versions of dealing
with your boss or someone who's an
upper-level person there's so many
different ways that you were supposed to
address them and that they had
eliminated all that by using English
yeah it made me think like just using
different styles of language the way
human beings communicate here is very
different than the way people
communicate say you know some African
countries write that we have these
different styles of interpreting the
world around us and those in turn have a
profound effect on the way we sort of
interface with the world I think that's
definitely right so it's a you know it's
so interesting to think about emotion
and language so it's often said that an
emotion like fear is universal across
the world but I don't think that's
actually correct
what's universal is danger and the way
fear is interpreted by different
cultures is obviously different I mean
different the agents have a different
kind of perspective on fear every
culture has their own perspective on
fear so if it's fear is the you know the
the kind of cultural assembly that you
have in your brain in response to danger
so every culture has to have a language
of fear but not because fear is
universal because danger is universal
hmm and what they interpret as danger is
different right and fear for one person
something could could create fear
whereas for another person the exact
same situation would not right depending
upon their personal experiences and
maybe even their genetic makeup well
yeah I mean yeah I'm genes contribute so
we every part of our brain is under some
kind of genetic influence so every for
example the amygdala will be genetically
kind of slightly more roughed up in one
person than another so a little more
sensitive to danger and so that person
might be responding more to danger in
part because of genes but also maybe
because of experiences that they've had
and so then the conscious mind is
seeing those responses and starting to
conclude oh I'm an anxious fearful
person and that all of that information
gets collected in what's called a fear
schema which is a body of knowledge of
everything you know about danger and
including the way you react you react to
danger and you're just you know who you
are in terms of danger and so whenever
you encounter danger that schema is
what's called pattern completed so
presence of a threat in the world is
enough to go into your brain and
activate those memories about danger
that give you and the non conscious
representation you know an activation of
this fear schema that is what then
bubbles up into consciousness that's
your experience of fear is what has been
activated in your fear schema knowing
what you know and then watching whatever
anxieties or fears may play out in your
own mind is that for lack of a better
term a mindfuck well I mean not heed
this so much and you're human yeah I
assume you have the same things I have a
lot of anxieties I'll do them and
curiously it helps to some extent in
1996 I published a book called the
emotional brain and few years later I
started finding out from therapists that
the lot of patients were reading the
book with their therapist and they were
saying that it was really helping them
understand why you know how different
things were happening that the the
amygdala was causing them to react in
certain situations but their fear was
their conscious understanding of those
reactions and those are not the same
thing and that separation helped them
you know navigate their own situation
and in a situation of danger separating
out okay that's my body is responding
this way my mind is responding this way
and these are two separate things I need
to work on in control have you studied
various ways that people mitigate
anxiety and fear like meditation and
yoga and all these different things that
sort of change
people States I mean I haven't I you
know I haven't studied it myself but I
have researched it a bit after I try to
do meditation myself because I think
it's the probably the most direct and
effective way in the moment to sitting
in the room outside waiting for it just
had my hat and sunglasses on just trying
to chill out meditate a little bit get
ready for you mm-hmm do you do that on a
regular basis you know it's hard to
maintain it because life gets busy and
it seems like it the hardest time to do
it is when you need it most right yeah I
think it's one of those things like
hygiene well you sort of have to say
well it's hard to take a shower they
don't have to take shit don't stink it
you have to brush your teeth yep you get
cavities you have to meditate you'll go
crazy yeah it's perfect that's the way
it should be done I think that is what
so when you examine those kind of tools
like tools that people have sort of
imagined or created to sort of in some
way alleviate anxiety or enhance
perspective do you do you spend much
time dwelling on the creation of those
things and what's going on there what I
mean by the creation well like a human
had to figure gotta meditate Bryson had
to figure out these modalities these
different ways to sort of interface yeah
so let's take that from take that to the
nature of most approaches to fear and
anxiety today hold this hold off the
meditation part slightly okay so we have
you know psychopharmacology it's a major
line of attack and also what's called
cognitive behavioral therapy and which
is arose as a form first called
behavioral therapy because it came out
of the behaviorist movement which said
there's no consciousness you know that
that the human is a stimulus response
organism that is based on the history of
reinforcement with certain kinds of
situations so behavior therapy was about
using
Lovan or operant conditioning to change
how the brain would respond to threats
and how people would act in those
situations it wasn't about the mind at
all is all about behavior and then
cognition was added to that so that
became cognitive behavioral therapy but
again the cognitive change was used as a
way of changing behavior because so much
emphasis has been placed on behavior in
our culture including in the drug
therapy world it's all based on changing
measurable things like behavior and
physiology and that I think that that's
why all of these things in some sense
have not worked out as well as we would
like you know the best in the best
medications and the best CBT trials will
give you like 75 percent record of help
in a group that's pretty great though
isn't it you still got 25 that's but
yeah but you also have to extract out
the placebo effect mm-hmm and in many of
these drug studies for example
depressive anti depression drugs the
placebo effect is you know only the drug
effect is only slightly better than the
placebo effect but when you have
cognitive behavioral therapy there's I
mean you're actually going for the
placebo effect right I mean you're
trying to nothing wrong with let's say
perfect in that sense though you are
trying to sort of you're trying to use
some sort of strategy with your mind and
therapy whether it's meditation what are
you doing you're trying to enact change
right and if that changes enacted
there's not a pill involved right so it
is kind of like the same mechanism
that's involved in a placebo effect your
mind is creating this new change yes and
so but the question is a person that
goes through the motions but doesn't get
the therapy right how much are they
changed by simply by kind of going
through it there's so many variations
with humans or I'd like to find out like
are they lazy self-destructive like and
why is that the case like maybe all of
the above oh yeah
yeah
but whenever you have I think 75% it's
amazing yeah you consider if you have a
group of people what are the odds if you
have a group of a hundred people what
are the odds of twenty-five of them are
gonna be lazy pretty good right yeah
pretty I mean I would bet a ton of money
that twenty-five percent of those people
don't do what they're supposed to do all
the time right so you know you're right
but I think the the issue is from the
scientific point of view we need to know
exactly what really works what's
different from placebo right so that we
can see what to build for medication for
medication for cognitive therapy as well
but the therapy thing is so strange to
me because you put okay maybe we're
using the wrong word with placebo
because placebo is a word for a
medication that has a psychosomatic
effect right well it's it's the control
group that doesn't get the treatment
that you get that it's not really doing
anything physiologically but your body
is interpreting it as medicine and
saying alright change is coming and then
the change comes and that is a real
thing but when you're thinking about
cognitive behavioral therapy you're
thinking about using techniques and
strategies to change the way you think
and behave though so the concept of the
placebo effect doesn't really apply
there well you have to have a control
group right in the study you have to
have randomized control in order to make
it so when you have cognitive behavioral
therapy and you have randomized control
and you have a control group do you just
give them shitty therapy we need to get
a therapist on here to give you that to
that cuz I don't know the answer you
gone to therapy yourself I have yeah did
you do that to examine this I you know I
mainly went into it with for the
meditation port hmm to try and calm some
of my you know restlessness has writing
and all this study that you had to do to
write these books has that enhanced you
I mean that you have much more of an
understanding about what's at play than
the average person does well
you know again it's kind of like the
patient who's reading the emotion of
bearing with the their therapist I think
by writing those books I learn a lot and
it helps me see things and that doesn't
necessarily help me lead my life any
better but it I think I understand it
better but no self no fear yeah well no
self no fear means that you have to be
you have to have this automatic
consciousness ability in order to be
afraid and that is a special human
quality the ability to put yourself in
the moment in your past and in your
future if it's not you that's gonna be
harmed by that snake then you don't have
to worry about what its gonna do to you
so if you are part of it then you worry
and it becomes you know it's an emotion
when you're involved so I think emotions
this is a crazy idea that's in the book
that emotions didn't arise through
natural selection really well that's the
idea that they were byproducts of other
capacities that came along first you had
some kind of crude language that enabled
this hierarchical relational reason to
jump across you know language gave you
categories to like conceptualize things
hierarchical reasoning allowed you to
jump across those categories and those
kinds of things allow you to
conceptualize yourself as an entity with
an experience so you had to have a self
that could do that kind of reasoning and
across those conceptual categories and
that is what enabled an emotion the
ability to put yourself into a
significant situation so now that it's
here now that we have once emotions are
there then they become selected but they
weren't selected by for example the
amygdala having evolved to be the fear
center and inherited that from animals
your animals probably have some kinds of
experiences but it's scientifically it's
very hard to know what they have well we
know like dogs have emotions right dog
wha
dogs get happy well you see their
behavior right but I'm not saying they
aren't but scientifically you can't
measure that right but if you have a dog
and you come home and he's so excited to
see you and he's running around circles
that seems very emotional well a kin
yeah but I don't said let's talk about
the brain for a second okay so the parts
of the brain circuits in the brain that
are involved in this kind of auto noetic
emotion that I'm talking about this self
involved in motion that's so human such
a human quality I the part of the brain
that I think is important and this is
still hypothesis it's not a fact is
something called the frontal poles very
very front part of the prefrontal cortex
that region is unique to the human brain
no other not even another ape has that
now other parts of the prefrontal cortex
are present in other primates all of the
primates but not in any other mammal so
if we can figure out in the human brain
what that frontal Pole does and what
that other part that all primates have
do then that gives us an anchor for
speculating about what other primates
what kinds of experience other primates
have given what those parts of the brain
enable in us and that would allow us to
then extract what other mammals don't
have that we have because they don't
have those parts of the brain so it's a
it's a kind of you know use of the brain
to tell us some things about what might
exist in other animals but there's no
way to ask a dog what's on your mind
right who can measure the brain with an
fMRI or something along those lines
where you get a reading of but that's
not an answer I mean it scarlet right so
a human like I can you know if you ask
me is there a pen here on the table I
say yes I can respond verbally or I can
point to
but when I'm responding verbally I can
only do that for something I'm conscious
of I can't respond to something on
unconscious of by naming it follow that
hmm
other animals can only respond
non-verbally so they don't have that
other kind of response that is only
reflecting a conscious state so I'm not
saying they don't have anything but
scientifically is very hard to know what
they have and the fact that we can study
it we know and for example fear that the
fear itself probably doesn't depend on
the amygdala but that all the behavior
that we see does makes us have to be
cautious about observing behaviors that
look like they're based on fear love and
all these other emotions when we can't
really know because we can't measure
that well I mean it's a tough problem
again I'm not saying that's not there
it's just like right I guess
scientifically you know you have to you
have to the evidence yes you have to now
now measuring it in humans is I mean
there's this concept of people I'm an
emotional person
you know I'm emotional like you I get
emotional like people love to say yeah
those those kind of things what is it
possible to measure varying degrees of
emotional response in terms of like how
it's affecting a person physiologically
whether or not these emotional responses
are physiological or whether you've gone
down a well grooved psychological path
that you've been sort of participating
in your whole life so that you have
these sort of triggers this happens and
then up I'm gonna I'm gonna start crying
this happens up I'm gonna get angry and
people sort of fall into those paths
without self-reflection without this
ability to be objective and
introspective and go why am i reacting
this way like what maybe you should stop
being so emotional Joe right anybody
ever said that to you yes my wife is say
well what does that mean
but you know what I mean like the this
the varying degrees of promotion or
response and whether or not those are
beneficial or whether or not they just
detract from your experience or inhibit
your your ability to be productive so
you know I
you've really nailed a lot of
interesting stuff in there and you know
it's a very kind of deep analysis of
what's going on so the problem is that
our language is so bad that all these
terms that we have we borrow from what's
called folk wisdom or folk psychology
you know that they've come through the
ages and this is true in every aspect of
science that you have folk terms you
know folk physics becomes real physics
and then the folk stuff goes away bulk
biology becomes real biology and then
you know the folk stuff goes away but in
psychology the folk stuff never goes
away because we always experience the
folk aspect of it when we have a
conscious experience that's what our
conscious minds is our folk psychology
of ourselves and of others and of other
animals but the underneath that is the
part that we can get rid of the folk
psychology because we can understand how
behavior is control how these
physiological responses are control and
ain't because you know we've had fears
causing it you know but but when you're
afraid you're almost always running from
the bear and feeling fear but and so you
assume that when you're running from the
bear fear is what causes you to run but
fear is not the answer
fear is your awareness that all that
should is happening to you mmm but also
the the ability to contemplate the
consequences right yeah that's gonna get
me me yeah that's all that's all you
know one interpretation after another
running forward but no self no fear
that's no possible either right
well if though I mean you need the self
to be afraid yeah so I mean that's your
and to be consciously afraid but you can
react to danger without the self and
that's what
yeah that's K you you find yourself
freezing or you're walking in New York
City and you jump back in the bus goes
flying by so you've reacted to danger
but only afterwards do you feel freer
when you cognitively become aware that
that's happening well in that sort of a
situation but in the situation like we
were walking down a dark alley and then
you see some guy who seems to be
following you yeah yep so now you're
you're in a situation where you're in a
potentially dangerous situation so now
you're anxious about what's gonna happen
so you're not starting with restarting
the things I did't worry about what's
gonna happen nothing there's nothing
there that's made you but then one of
you ramps it up hey Joe
yeah let's come over here man I'd like
to borrow some money from you oh my gosh
it sounds fear is that fear now you've
got a specific threat and yeah so you
now you're into fear and then that's
gonna morph into another anxiety about
what the hell is this guy gonna do to me
right so but all of that Malloy is gonna
go into your brain and trigger your
muscle tension your heart to race and so
forth and the dark alley is going to go
to your cortex and you're going to be
interpreting the fact that you're in a
dark alley and your heart is racing in
terms of being anxious and fearful and
all of that but they're happening
separately it's not one bundle it's like
separate things in the brain and once we
understand that it becomes I think a
much easier problem how to approach
problems of fear and anxiety you've got
to separately treat the behavior in the
physiology from the conscious thoughts
and in between those two you also got to
change the cognitions that underlie the
the conscious experience but also the
cognitions can trigger behavior so you
know one of the things we've we've
proposed a proposes in my last book
anxious was a kind of test program for
exploring this where be kind of a
three-part three-step program
first you would you'd have to do it with
something simple like a smart or phobic
of what spider phobic or snake phobia
oh so you would do exposure therapy
subliminally that means you're
imminently present the picture of a
snake or the spider so fast the
conscious mind doesn't know it's there
so like those old hungry eat popcorn
things exactly and that's a very common
technique in psychology so they would
show you a film and there'd be at one or
two frames of a spider if you had a wrap
or just a picture you know art but could
be a film yeah okay and but it would
have to go very fast in the film so they
would so with a picture you just present
it really quickly and because you know
normally if you show a spider phobic try
to do expose your therapy they don't
want to do it because they don't want to
deal with spiders but they they they're
conscious mind doesn't know what's
happening because it's going through
subliminally so the amygdala is being
tamed by the exposure and now they can
look at the picture without you know the
body reacting they're not jumping
they're not their heart isn't racing
because the amygdala has been turned off
so all those body responsive have calmed
down so now the person can kind of go
some undergo some cognitive change about
looking at spiders and so forth and then
finally once you've done those two steps
the brains ready for talk therapy and
meditation and other kinds of
mindfulness approaches because all of
the the impediments to all that have
been put aside by these first two steps
so as anybody ever like officially cured
someone of arachnophobia or video field
video phobia or you know fear of snakes
or spiders like those are those seem to
be almost like deep-seated genetic fears
well that we right now our ancestors yes
had a snake and but they very right
which is what's weird that means they're
certainly experienced venomous snakes
and but there's something about some
people have almost illogical reaction to
it that it's often been speculated that
this is some sort of a genetic memory of
someone perhaps
in their ancestry lines surviving a
snake attack or losing someone to a
snake it's more you know turns out that
the it's more about the ability to
rapidly learn about those kinds of
dangers than to innately respond mmm so
there seems to be it's called prepared
learning so you have an evolutionarily
based thing that's with you that
everyone has some version of but you
know varies from individual to
individual and then some people are
prone to rapidly learn that either
because of other experiences or because
of their particular genetic makeup and
so they tend to go down the road of
acquiring these kinds of phobias now so
it's the problem with treating that by
just extinguishing it through exposure
is that the extinction is always
impermanent you know if you once you've
been reduced nothing is wrong this is
true in a rat or person let's say the
rat has been given a tone that's been
paired with a shot and then it hears the
tone 20 or 30 times stops responding but
then if it goes back in the the room of
the chamber where the shock had occurred
the tone will again bring it elicit it
and the spyder phobic returns to the
place where he or she was bitten by a
spider or a place where spiders it was
supposed to be present it can come back
so these are imperfect temporary
solutions they're not enough and that's
why I mean they're called these are
called
you know reinstatement and things like
that because they pop back up so maybe
medications can help tamp that down a
bit
so medications are useful in in that
sense of being able to control the
behavior in the physiology but less so
in terms of changing the mental state
because you know how could you possibly
design a medication that would know how
to change the content of a mental state
I mean that seems like an impossible yes
and that's what you want to do you don't
want to change all mental states right
you want to change the one
content you know I'm afraid of spiders
yeah uh it's it's so fascinating though
how people vary so widely in their their
reaction to certain fears or to certain
things that could induce fear whether
it's dogs or you know whatever
irrational thing that people have the
the source of that is really often
speculated that there's like some sort
of a genetic component to it do you buy
into that so let's say let's say that
you know in any kind of situation like
that there are multiple systems in the
brain that are going to be involved
we're gonna isolate the amygdala as you
know hypothetical part of that system
that is detecting and responding to the
stimulus so we're gonna go into the
amygdala and focus on one little part of
it called the lateral nucleus that
doesn't matter but it's the part that
gets the input from the outside world so
that is the gateway into the amygdala so
now let's talk about let's say it's got
100,000 cells and neurons and each of
those neurons is going to have a bell
curve that's based on the genes that
made that cell and whatever kinds of
electrical signals it's had throughout
the life of the organism so you can have
a hundred thousand bell curves you know
various degrees that when the stimulus
comes in those cells that that are
activated their little bell curves are
going to determine how much they respond
to that and that's going to propagate to
other cells that have their own bell
curves in areas and so on down the line
that what happens at the level of
behavior is a very complicated kind of
summation of all those bell curves of
all those cells that happen to be
activated so it's not like you know one
thing is progress it's not like a brain
areas program it's all about what's
happened at those specific cells both
through genetics and experience so we
often kind of oversimplify things by
thinking well there's a gene or an area
that has inherited that thing when you
think of human beings and you think of
what we used to be when we're some sort
of a lower hominid and now what we are
now and you think of all these various
components that are at play do you do
you ever try to imagine what a human of
a thousand years or ten thousand a
hundred thousand years from now will be
like well they're they're gonna be
different you know that we're not every
organism is in constant change
you know the racial mixing interbreeding
happens and so in the mutation random
mutations we're living longer and so you
know that's creating meat people are
having babies later that will change a
lot of stuff so we're gonna be a
different thing at some point we may
split out into a whole new kind of human
the the thing about people having babies
older I mean there's certainly physical
limitations when people start having
babies older but on the plus side you're
dealing with someone that has a lot more
life experience that's raising a child
yeah you know versus my mom had me when
she was 20 21
you know what the fuck do you know you
don't know much but if you're a woman
who has a child when you're 40 well hey
that's a rich life of a lot of
experiences and maybe you can impart
some of that wisdom to your child and
look at things in a different way and
maybe that in turn will raise a child
that's more balanced you know I'm
talking out of my area here but I I
think that probably you know the eggs
sit around for a long time and I don't
know what the effect of aging on the egg
is mmm I just don't know well there's
also a big factor with the male sperm
male sperm is a thing and that's one of
the main contributed by autism and
schizophrenia is supposedly I've heard
of that you know older fathers are more
likely to
have male sons that are schizophrenic
yeah that makes sense
I would say that is the fact but I've
heard that well it all makes sense that
there be some glitches and the matrix's
yeah I mean we're not we're not supposed
to live that long are we not what are
your thoughts on people that are trying
to live longer and and trying to sort of
squeeze out as much time as I can on
this rock no it's like I see a lot of
old people that just don't want to live
anymore and I understand that you know
your body starts falling apart mind is
going what's the point at that point
yeah but what about the people that can
keep it together yeah yeah I guess if
you keep it together you want to like
you know okay let's just go sports okay
let's go to the moon and go to Mars
well pharmacological solutions to it I
mean if we if there was some sort of a
genetic component that they identified
to aging and they gave the option to
reverse the process would you
participate or do you like it
do you like the finite nature of this
existence uh I do I think so it's like I
knew you I think I don't and that I take
certain medications but rather just live
most of my life as as possible without
them so what medications do you take you
know blood pressure and mainly blood
pressure stuff yeah do you exercise not
enough that's all yeah they got a big
effect on anxiety and a big effect on
just yes a general alleviation of angst
so that's a good example of something I
know I should do yet is that a
discipline issue uh I used to be kind of
discipline but what happened
I've been using it a lot to you you know
to do things like I really want to do
like writing or making music and so
those are the things that kind of I know
I should like do the exercise too so I
can do more of that longer yeah you
think do you have a finite amount of
discipline uh possibly each person has
it you know define that has that sort of
anxiety quotient that discipline
quotient that we kind of you probably
can work that like a muscle yeah what
imagine you can yeah yeah you could
become something different might me and
my friends have this thing that we did
last year called sober October for the
entire month you know no alcohol no
marijuana no drugs and crazy exercise
like last year we had a competition to
see like who could exercise the most we
wore these heartrate monitors and we we
measured points like you get a certain
amount of points at 80 percent of your
max heart rate per minute what my point
is one of the things that I got out of
this and we all got out we all talked
about it because we were exercising
hours and hours a day an incredible
alleviation of anxiety incredible like
to the point
exercise regularly but I don't exercise
at that level that that level that we
were doing cuz we were in this
competition was really a lot of cardio
but my god that runner's high is real
yeah I felt amazing I mean I felt like
so good all the time the alleviation of
angst was unlike anything the internal
chatter yeah that sort of can fuck with
your head yeah that just didn't exist
anymore
well I think that that's wonderful that
you're saying that because you have so
many followers and I think that's such
fantastic information to convey to them
it is and it's so available to all of us
I mean anybody that can move their body
can experience us and I don't recommend
what we did because we were working out
five hours six hours but even was you
know I walk I live in New York so I walk
a lot and that's great yeah right you
have to yeah but I mean just that alone
yeah it's it's there's many people that
don't walk you know you just sit here
and then you move to that spot you sit
there and you get in the car you sit
there yeah you get on the train you sit
there and there's very little use of the
body and the body starts to atrophy yeah
by pumping that blood through the system
and cleaning out the pipes and getting
that air into the lungs and forcing
yourself to move when it's over you feel
better I'm breathing better and
imagining it imagining this exercise
what do you take what about nature do
you take any time in nature at all do
you go to Central Park well we have a
house up in Sullivan County in the
Catskills oh that's nice how often you
get a chance to get out there we spend a
lot of time there in the summer
oh that's and do you go better when
you're up there yeah definitely
interesting right it takes a couple of
days to like get into the rhythm yeah
but then it's good but once you do do
you ever think man what the fuck am i
doing living in Manhattan always
buildings yeah you know my wife I'm not
shitting my wife's in New Yorker so I'm
by births a week there we need we need
to go in and then we want to come back
my friend Jeff has a place on Fire
Island it's a beautiful place he
beautiful and he lives in Manhattan as
well but he says like as a welder
birthday your birthday yeah he says as
he's gotten older he really don't
doesn't think that he could live in
Manhattan anymore if it wasn't for this
ability to escape right and go somewhere
and just wake up in the morning look
I'll see the ocean having a cup of
coffee moving to Brooklyn was kind of
like that getting out of Manhattan yeah
yeah I know that if you don't live in
New York that may not make a lot of
sense to people so you know you
Manhattan is just like this supercharged
all the time and it's not it's not a try
thing it's you you know you it's it's a
true thing that you once you get out of
Manhattan everything is just a notch
down yeah and I've definitely step off
the subway and you kind of feel a little
bit more relaxed do you think that's
cause Brooklyn I mean it's just
speculative but there's still a lot of
people in Brooklyn yeah but there's no
skyscrapers whew I mean they're starting
to be lots of tall buildings yeah but
what's a good tall building in Brooklyn
like 30 30 right residences you know
what's Manhattan like 89 yeah there's
some giant buildings I'd looked out the
other day I guess from the airplane and
there's something in north Manhattan
that looks like it's way above the
Empire State Building in terms of size I
don't know what that is
if you thought about that existence like
in terms of like how unnatural it is and
how recent it is this ability to jam
untold millions or how many people are
in Manhattan oh boy you know I have no
idea like I think eight million is
something in New York City but probably
and then for some commuters as well so
eight million plus all the people that
come in from the different places to
work there yeah and just stuffed into an
incredibly small area and stacked on top
of each other yeah that has got to be a
completely new psychological State for
the human animal all right yeah there
was just I remember when I first got
into psychology I was reading something
about something called a behavioral sink
it was about how rats living in an
impoverished environment under highly
crowded conditions their behavioral
repertoire sort of like diminished a lot
so I think that was you know sort of
used to kind of challenge urban living
and to blame a lot of urban decay in the
seventies on I don't think it was
necessarily a good idea but it was kind
of a way to explain some things that I
think it wasn't really good at
explaining yeah it's true that that the
people do live under fairly crowded
conditions but you can't explain
everything in terms of very simple
processes are you aware of the studies
that they did where they set cameras up
on streets and they set them in distance
apart and they measured footsteps how
fast people walked and then they
measured the way people talk how many
syllables and how many sentences they
can get in in a certain amount of time
and through measuring footsteps and how
fast people walked and the way they
talked they could accurately determine
how big the city was that they live that
way yeah they could accurately figure
out whether or not they lived in a high
population density whether or not they
lived in a small town by the way they
talked and the way they walk interesting
that there's a profound effect I have a
caller I used to have a colleague at NYU
named John
is that Yale now and he used to do these
studies where he would he was a social
psychologist he would have people that
come in students come into the lab and
take these letters and they were like
scrambled and he'd have to like they'd
have to unscramble them and to send so I
guess it was words and you'd have to
unscramble them and put them into a
sentence and if the unscramble sentence
was about being older and elder him
anything about being elderly and age it
would take the students longer to walk
down the hallway to get to the elevator
afterwards oh is this like activating
this kind of schema of aging that
top-down had some kind of effect on the
way you walk that well that makes sense
and you do see what's really interesting
to me is when you see the differences
between people who are the same age who
behave and think very differently and I
always wonder how much of that is
biological how much is that a
psychological how much of that is like
well this person just has a better
genetic makeup you know and so they've
you know in their 50s they still have
tons of energy whereas this person maybe
has a shit makeup and bad lifestyle
choices and they look like what we
considered you know an old man when we
were younger then well I mean we're all
so complicated and there's so many
factors to go into you know you know
shaping how we end up at any point in
our life where do you think selfishness
came from out of noetic consciousness so
that's this ability to put yourself into
an experience which as I said earlier is
responsible for our greatest
achievements as a species but also is
what will potentially do us in it allows
us to not only envision a world in which
you know we can be self less self you
know not selfish but help others but
also how to exclude others and it I
think it's a natural basic animal
instinct to stay alive obviously you
know with Richard Dawkins said the
theory
The Selfish Gene animals are incredibly
selfish and you know their struggle for
existence so that kind of automatic
selfishness is there but what the auto
noetic mind allows us to do is to be
intentionally willfully selfish to allow
us to choose to do these things for our
own personal good for example I think
that the the auto noetic human human
mind is the only entity in the history
of life that's been ever to put the
organism and we're talking about the
conscious mind being a small part of the
what's going on in the cortex to put all
of the rest of the brain and all of the
body at risk for the simple sake of a
thrill mountain climbing you know
swimming and shark-infested waters or
taking drugs at dangerous levels no
other organism can commit suicide in the
sense of intentionally planning to put
an end to an entity that it knows has
the possible end so our conscious minds
are special in good ways and bad ways
yeah the conscious mind that seeks
thrills what do you think is the root of
that like I've always wondered like why
certain people are drawn to doing like
flips on motorcycles or certain people
are drawn to climbing mountains with no
ropes like what do you think that is you
know I'm just guessing I don't really
know but I think that we each have these
kind of physiological states that that
we try to maintain you know some kind
our homeostatic levels are are different
and some people need a little more
adrenaline or a little more you know I
hate to use adrenaline in the kind of
cheap way of you know just saying it's
just need more of a rush or kind of
potty activity because all that also
affects the brain and so consciously
you strive you may go looking for those
kinds of things to get the rush and it's
you know it's a it's sort of on the
spectrum of addiction in the sense where
you need that that physiological change
that the drug induces but you know we
also have addictions in our lives that
are habits and things that that we
develop and pursue they're not
necessarily good for us but that we kind
of feel compelled to do do you know what
Alex Honnold is yeah yeah I've had him
on podcast a couple of times and every
time I talk to my hands start getting
sweaty nervous for folks who don't know
who we're talking about he's the
probably the most famous free solo
climber in the world and he climbs these
seemingly impossible mountains with no
ropes and there's video of him doing it
like this drone footage of him climbing
these Peaks and my hands just pouring
but when I talk to him what's really
interesting is he's a calm rational
intelligent man who's very thoughtful
and he's he's a very kind guy he doesn't
seem like some you know I think of when
I think of someone who likes to do flips
off with a motorcycle or do radical I
think of some crazy wild thrill seeker
some-some dude who just needs to
constantly or a woman who needs to be
constantly freaked out he's not that guy
and when he describes it what's really
interesting is he goes it's very mellow
he's like if there's anything if there's
really a thrill I've done something
horribly wrong like the real thrills are
so scary because that means you're about
to die so he's instead of getting the
thrill he's getting that piece yeah but
he's getting a piece from putting
himself extreme okay and there's also
the thing of other people praising you
for your risk-taking which is an odd
thing about humans and they've shown
through natural weather there's a
natural selection aspect of
with females and mates that females are
attracted to men that do those crazy
things and take crazy risks for some
strange reason whether it's some sort of
a remnant of our ancient past like that
thrill-seeking a man has got not gonna
be he's not gonna shy away from combat
he will protect our children or
something like that right yeah I mean
there's a lot of evolutionary psychology
you know you know that a lot of that is
speculative of the horse but it's the
thrill-seeker is that's one it's one of
the weirder things when everything's
great and you have plenty of food and
you live in cities and like okay look
I'm not getting enough juice here yeah
I'm gonna have to learn how to hand
glide or something you know and yeah
some people may do it for attention yes
yeah the things people do for attention
um creativity is that debt to me is one
of the more interesting aspects of being
human beings our ability to create
things and our desire to create things
and in a way that's also along the same
lines right because you're getting
rewarded right for it well probably yes
I mean all these things are as a child
is developing and growing up and passing
through different kinds of situations in
life I think a lot of stuff happens kind
of randomly you know so the child may do
something that someone views is creative
and so as you said the child is
rewarding them so then that allows them
to figure out what you know explore kind
of how they did that and and maybe
continue to do it but other people may
simply have minds that go in that
direction on their own where as as we
talked about earlier their thoughts are
able to jump across conceptual
categories and and sort of transcend
those categories into new completely new
ideas and so forth and you know I don't
think we know how the brain does that at
all that's a very good question for the
future but it's not something we have a
great deal of understanding of I mean
there could be an area of research on it
that I just don't know about it it's a
big feel but I certainly don't know the
answer to how creativity comes about
well it's interesting too creativity has
a reward system built in for the person
who creates even-even without
recognition from others there's some
fundamentally satisfying feeling of
creating something it's fun yeah why do
you think that is well novelty is
rewarding not very enforcing you know
it's a and certainly creativity is
novelty it's like anything that it's
novel that you do has a kind of you know
charge effect to it I would think yeah I
mean it's people like you who study this
stuff to me are so important because
most of us are just banging into walls
just trying to figure out why we do what
we do and to have an ability to
understand the scientific explanations
for the various things that are at play
it's it's so it's so critical because
you can kind of like not necessarily
stop the process but at least be aware
of it while it's going down is that part
of what you wanted to do when you were
writing well I don't thank you for you
know crediting me for that but the you
know a lot of what we've been talking
about we've just been having a
conversation my work is very rather
limited and all I don't work on
creativity and all these things so I'm
you work on the way the mind work I work
on yeah I mean I think about how the
work the mind works but I work on how
the brain detects in response to danger
so that allows me to go back to my early
work on consciousness and to bring it in
and layer it on top of all that other
stuff but yeah it's a you know I get
tremendous value out of sitting there
writing and because when you start a
book in my case I think this is probably
true of many people you don't you have
no idea how you're gonna get to the end
you know you have a beginning and you
just see where it goes so this idea of
writing a proposal
so that lays out the whole thing to me
doesn't work because you just don't know
where it's going and the fun part is
getting to the end the brain reacting to
danger do you did you did you do any
interviews with people who are soldiers
or interview fighters or people that are
involved in extreme activities that yeah
not having to haven't done a lot of
interviews I mean I have talked to
people like that and you know every
individual cases are interesting because
they give you stuff but it's not data so
the data you have to go out and collect
yeah what do you got there for notes you
know pile of notes RJ oh I don't want to
discuss I just thought this brought this
I think we covered most of what I want
to say you know the amygdala is not a
fear Center behaviors not primarily a
tool of the mind it's a tool of survival
we think we know why we do the things we
do and others do them but we don't
really because we our conscious mind is
not privy to all of the things that the
body and brain are doing now when you
wanted to examine danger and you want to
examine the mind and how it reacts to
danger and fear and threats what what we
trying to get out of this well I started
out thinking this was a way to study
emotion and at the time I had been
studying these these human patients with
the split brain surgery and can you
explain that because you tore that
earlier but the split brain Center is
alleviation of epilepsy it's a way to
control epilepsy that can't be
controlled in any other way medications
are not working so you have like young
kids teenagers that have lived most of
their life this paralyzed by epilepsy
and not being able to lead a life there
was one patient to basically his parents
from constantly having to hold him down
on a mattress he was seizing so often so
and this is not this is only done in
a very extreme set of conditions and
it's not done that much anymore but when
it's done it's the connections between
the two sides of the brain room are
separated so information one side
doesn't cross over to the other they do
that they open up the skull pull the two
you know you've got kind of two loaves
of bread sitting next to each other and
they're connected by threads which are
axons that go between them and so you
pull apart here and you can see where
those axons are and you open it up from
the top so imagine like a hot dog bun
okay and so you open it up at the top
and you can look down in the center and
imagine that there was like a bunch of
wires crossing between the two sides of
the bun so those wires would then be
surgically sectioned and so now you end
up with two sides of the brain separate
and independent
so typically language is on the left
side so you can talk to that side the
right side doesn't have language so you
have to ask what what can it do so if
you present a stimulus that only the
right hemisphere sees and you do that by
flashing a picture of an apple on the
left side of space because everything to
the left of center goes to the right
hemisphere and everything to the right
of center goes to the left hemisphere so
you send a stimulus to the right
hemisphere and you say what did you see
and the left hemisphere answers because
that's worth languages he says I didn't
say anything
so okay you said reach into this bag and
see what's in there the right hand goes
in that's connected to the left
hemisphere can't find it the left hand
goes in connected to the right
hemisphere that which saw the Apple it
pulls out the Apple so the right
hemisphere has information that the left
hemisphere can't talk about what is life
like for people once they've done that
operation
well slowly it the left hemisphere kind
of comes to dominate again
the you know they they come to live with
it and how does it prevent seizures well
the the folklore of it I don't know if
this is actually true but what is often
said is that it prevents the seizures
from jumping back and forth and having
you know because the the electrical
activity jumping back and forth sort of
gets into a kind of endless loop that
can't stop but cutting that isolates the
seizures and the two hemispheres and
makes each one more controllable like
taking the medication Jesus so imagine
being though first gotta try that out
everybody I got an idea let your brain
like a hot dog bun so but what we were
interested in in these patients that we
were studying like this was my mentor
Michael Gazzaniga and I were studying
these at Dartmouth Medical School we
were at Stony Brook out on Long Island
we would drive up to Dartmouth to see
these patients was how does the left
hemisphere cope with the fact that the
right hemispheres performed a behavior
that the at the left hemisphere that you
talked to didn't come and so we would
you know put information in the right
hemisphere the guy would stand up I said
why'd you do that I needed to stretch or
you know scratched his hands or I had an
itch so I needed to scratch it and so
time after time the left hemisphere
would generate a narrative that made its
behavior makes sense so that's why I got
interested in how non conscious systems
would be generating behaviors that we
had we generate narratives to explain
because at the time that we were doing
this the idea of cognitive dissonance
was very popular and what that means is
that when cognitively when you do
something behaviorally that is
incongruent with what you cognitively
know it's disturbing it causes
dissonance and so you have to engage in
some kind of dissonance reduction
so our hypothesis was these narratives
that the left hemisphere is generating
about right hemisphere behaviors it was
a way of the left hemispheres conscious
mind kind of keeping it all together the
consciousness thinks that it's in charge
that you know the brain and body are
it's you know it's it's the control
center and everything else is there to
satisfy its whims and so it generates
these narratives to keep that sense of
unity going even though it's no longer
unified that is so fascinating that the
brain tries to seek some sort of an
explanation for the actions that you
provoked right externally and that's why
I got into emotion because well maybe
emotion systems produce these yes I'm
doing what I'm looking this up alien
hand syndrome came up do you know
anything about this I don't I'm sorry
okay so there's a long article
explaining this thing called alien hand
syndrome and also known as dr.
Strangelove syndrome a fixture of
doctors truth the explanations are very
strange about people's hands doing
something that's not explained right
it's kind of the same yeah do they
generate an explanation when they do
then it just explains different
scenarios people have had like a leg
walk in the wrong direction or buttoning
up your shirt with your left hand right
hand starts unbuttoning that seems to be
like some sort of a neurological problem
well they split brain patients with you
know the right after surgery when things
are really like fucked up so really it
would be like pulling the pants down
with one hand pulling them up with the
Wow so there's one patient I saw in the
hospital the young kid the left hand
reaches out to grab the nurse on the ass
can I say that day yeah and the right
hand is pulling it back there's like a
physical struggle yeah there's like this
and you know and it all kind of like
over time they don't come back together
but the sumthin ago she ate something
where it's not so dramatic the woman who
thinks her alien hand wants her to be a
better person
yes I'm thinking these are some sort of
physiologic yeah well it's uh
what a crazy solution to epilepsy I know
there's other solutions that but that it
was a last-ditch effort yeah
and so for a severe severe cases yeah
and I think it's not done that often to
eventually sort of achieve some sort of
normalization yeah you know that they've
lives the kids have lived so long in the
state by the time they get there their
brains changed like that that I don't
know really ultimately what what became
of all these people because I moved on
to other fields and but I think in
general they live a somewhat better life
but I doubt they ever live a completely
full normal life for me how could you
after all that but I'm really interested
in the the the brain creating these
narratives to explain yeah that's it
there's so many people that do things
like that yeah right they'll try to
explain their life away and give
themselves excuses and give themselves
reasons for behavior and one of the
things you see with the more rational
people is it's never their fault it's
always someone else's fault well that's
the four billion years story that how we
generate how we got to these narratives
that's what it's all about
Wow listen man this is amazing stuff
please tell buddy everybody your books
where they can get them how they can
find them are they available in audio as
well right yeah so the the new book is
called the deep history of ourselves the
four billion year story of how we got
conscious brains and you can get that on
Amazon you can get the other audible on
audible.com you know Barnes no I think
all the major booksellers have the books
last book was anxious it also has an
audible version always wanted to get
like Christopher Walken to do my did you
not not do it a night into it they
didn't ask for anything I would want you
to do it that's your work I get bummed
out when someone else reads like one of
the good things about like Pinker and
Gladwell they read their own books like
they've never offered it to me you
should decide next Amanda well for my
for my memoir all definitely yeah oh
there you go
well thank you for being here I really
really appreciate it and thanks thanks
for all your work did I just say one
thing yes please
so sometimes I when I release books I
also release music to go with them so
anxious had a record with it and deep
history has some songs of life that are
on the deep history.com website oh
that's cool so you're you are a musician
yeah bringing that up all right yeah I
got a couple of bands and a couple bands
well then the main band is the
amygdaloid amygdaloid calm that's
awesome and yeah it's a rock band we
created our own genre heavy mental songs
about mind and brain and mental
disorders they're love songs but most
rock songs or love songs about mental
disorders anyway yes yeah you just be
the mystic duo so we are which is a lot
easier to get around without drums and
amps and stuff it's two acoustic guitars
awesome we play the acoustic versions of
the amygdaloid all right well thank you
Joe appreciate you thanks been fun
thanks you
[Music]